[Unknown]: I.V.M.
[Amit Varma]: The internet is amazing, isn't it?
[Amit Varma]: When I first began to explore the internet,
[Amit Varma]: more than 20 years ago,
[Amit Varma]: I was blown away by the possibilities.
[Amit Varma]: I thought, wow, this is going to do so much
[Amit Varma]: to help people express themselves
[Amit Varma]: and to help people communicate with each other.
[Amit Varma]: The internet put the tools of publishing
[Amit Varma]: into the hands of every individual.
[Amit Varma]: Anyone, with a little effort,
[Amit Varma]: could start a webpage of her own.
[Amit Varma]: With even less effort, one could start a blog.
[Amit Varma]: And as time went by, with almost no effort at all,
[Amit Varma]: we could write posts about our lives
[Amit Varma]: that all our friends could read.
[Amit Varma]: We could broadcast our thoughts to the world,
[Amit Varma]: 140 characters at a time.
[Amit Varma]: We could post pictures and videos
[Amit Varma]: and comment on the pictures and videos of others
[Amit Varma]: and discover ourselves and the world around us
[Amit Varma]: as distinctions of geography
[Amit Varma]: and race and class
[Amit Varma]: and even language would cease to matter.
[Amit Varma]: At the least, because of the internet,
[Amit Varma]: human beings would talk to each other
[Amit Varma]: much more than they ever did before.
[Amit Varma]: That's what I thought then.
[Amit Varma]: But, alas, it hasn't quite
[Amit Varma]: worked out that way.
[Amit Varma]: One of the big lessons of our modern age is this.
[Amit Varma]: We may all talk a lot
[Amit Varma]: at the same time,
[Amit Varma]: but no one really listens anymore.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Seen and the Unseen,
[Unknown]: our weekly podcast on economics,
[Unknown]: politics, and behavioral science.
[Unknown]: Please welcome your host, Amit Badma.
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Seen and the Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: This is episode 49 of this weekly podcast,
[Amit Varma]: and the first one in which I will have no guest.
[Amit Varma]: I'll be on my own.
[Amit Varma]: Just for this one episode,
[Amit Varma]: my intention was to try and go solo
[Amit Varma]: and sort of freewheel my way through it.
[Amit Varma]: Just me and my thoughts.
[Amit Varma]: I figured that as this releases
[Amit Varma]: and goes on,
[Amit Varma]: I'll talk about the year
[Amit Varma]: that just passed by.
[Amit Varma]: But having started this episode
[Amit Varma]: by talking about how we don't listen
[Amit Varma]: to each other anymore,
[Amit Varma]: I'm going to talk a little bit more
[Amit Varma]: about that and what it's done to our political discourse.
[Amit Varma]: And I guess it's kind of ironic
[Amit Varma]: then that I don't have a guest on this episode
[Amit Varma]: because that makes it the first episode
[Amit Varma]: where I won't be listening at all.
[Amit Varma]: Three weeks ago,
[Amit Varma]: in episode 46 of The Seen and the Unseen,
[Amit Varma]: I spoke to my good friend Prem Panikkar
[Amit Varma]: about the state of the media.
[Amit Varma]: What I was trying
[Amit Varma]: to wrap my head around was this.
[Amit Varma]: Back in the 80s and 90s when I grew up,
[Amit Varma]: before the internet was ubiquitous,
[Amit Varma]: we got all our news and information
[Amit Varma]: from certain mainstream media sources.
[Amit Varma]: We'd get one or more newspapers at home.
[Amit Varma]: In my case, I've been a captive audience
[Amit Varma]: of The Times of India, among others.
[Amit Varma]: We'd have a handful of TV stations to choose from.
[Amit Varma]: And just by dint of inertia,
[Amit Varma]: we were a captive audience for them.
[Amit Varma]: We were passive consumers
[Amit Varma]: of information.
[Amit Varma]: And most of us, when we had things to say,
[Amit Varma]: would communicate that to individuals
[Amit Varma]: or at best small groups of people.
[Amit Varma]: The internet changed all that.
[Amit Varma]: And thank goodness for that.
[Amit Varma]: The internet put the tools of publishing
[Amit Varma]: in the hands of individuals
[Amit Varma]: and reduced the cost dramatically.
[Amit Varma]: You no longer had a gatekeeper, like a newspaper editor,
[Amit Varma]: who would look at your thoughts
[Amit Varma]: before they were published.
[Amit Varma]: You were not tied down to the news cycle.
[Amit Varma]: You weren't tied down to standard formats of content
[Amit Varma]: like the 800-word op-ed, for example.
[Amit Varma]: When I started my blog
[Amit Varma]: in 2003, India Uncut,
[Amit Varma]: I found it liberating
[Amit Varma]: that I could post three thoughts when I wanted to.
[Amit Varma]: A post could be one sentence
[Amit Varma]: if I felt like it, or a 7000-word essay.
[Amit Varma]: And I didn't have to
[Amit Varma]: worry about what anyone other than me
[Amit Varma]: thought of it.
[Amit Varma]: So many people I knew started writing blogs,
[Amit Varma]: and blogs tended to find their own audiences.
[Amit Varma]: There was a greater diversity
[Amit Varma]: of voices out there now.
[Amit Varma]: And more diversity is always, always a good thing.
[Amit Varma]: I was already a journalist,
[Amit Varma]: but the success of India Uncut
[Amit Varma]: got me invitations to write columns for newspapers
[Amit Varma]: and many other bloggers also made similar transitions.
[Amit Varma]: But of course, that's history now,
[Amit Varma]: as blogs are more or less dead.
[Amit Varma]: Social media democratised
[Amit Varma]: this process even further.
[Amit Varma]: Blogs were an outlet for those who liked to write.
[Amit Varma]: Social media gave an outlet
[Amit Varma]: to everybody.
[Amit Varma]: Anybody could post a Facebook update about what they did that day,
[Amit Varma]: or how they were feeling.
[Amit Varma]: They could post their vacation pictures,
[Amit Varma]: they could see the vacation pictures of others.
[Amit Varma]: On Twitter, they could reach out to like-minded people,
[Amit Varma]: or expand their own world views
[Amit Varma]: by engaging with people from outside
[Amit Varma]: their narrow geographical circles.
[Amit Varma]: Technology enabled this,
[Amit Varma]: and smartphones allowed us to do so much more,
[Amit Varma]: including make feature films if we wanted to.
[Amit Varma]: This was the empowerment
[Amit Varma]: of the individual,
[Amit Varma]: the great libertarian dream.
[Amit Varma]: But that's not all that happened.
[Amit Varma]: Let me take a detour for a moment
[Amit Varma]: to a social science experiment
[Amit Varma]: carried out in 2005
[Amit Varma]: by Cass Sunstein,
[Amit Varma]: David Shcade, and Reid Hastie.
[Amit Varma]: I read about this in an excellent short book
[Amit Varma]: by Sunstein called
[Amit Varma]: On Rumours.
[Amit Varma]: The study itself is titled
[Amit Varma]: What Happened on Deliberation Day?
[Amit Varma]: You can find it on Google if you search for it.
[Amit Varma]: So in this study, Sunstein and his colleagues
[Amit Varma]: gathered together 60 people
[Amit Varma]: and divided them into 10 groups
[Amit Varma]: of 6 people each.
[Amit Varma]: This grouping was not random.
[Amit Varma]: It was done so that each group was
[Amit Varma]: more or less homogenous, and all 6 members
[Amit Varma]: in it fit the same kind of
[Amit Varma]: profile in terms of political
[Amit Varma]: ideology. And broadly speaking,
[Amit Varma]: half of these groups were liberal
[Amit Varma]: in the American sense, and half were conservative.
[Amit Varma]: At the start of the experiment,
[Amit Varma]: each participant was asked
[Amit Varma]: a series of hot-button questions.
[Amit Varma]: Their anonymous answers were noted down.
[Amit Varma]: Then they went into a room
[Amit Varma]: with their group of like-minded people
[Amit Varma]: and discussed those issues.
[Amit Varma]: 15 minutes after the group discussion ended,
[Amit Varma]: they were again asked the same
[Amit Varma]: set of questions, anonymously
[Amit Varma]: and one by one. Here's how
[Amit Varma]: Sunstein summarized the results.
[Amit Varma]: Start quote. In almost
[Amit Varma]: every other group, members ended up
[Amit Varma]: holding more extreme positions after
[Amit Varma]: they spoke with one another.
[Amit Varma]: Aside from increasing extremism,
[Amit Varma]: the experiment had an independent
[Amit Varma]: effect. It made both liberal
[Amit Varma]: and conservative groups significantly
[Amit Varma]: more homogenous and thus
[Amit Varma]: squelched diversity.
[Amit Varma]: Moreover, the rift between liberals
[Amit Varma]: and conservatives widened
[Amit Varma]: as a result of discussing.
[Amit Varma]: End quote. Sunstein
[Amit Varma]: called this effect group polarization.
[Amit Varma]: He defined it thus.
[Amit Varma]: Start quote. When like-minded people
[Amit Varma]: deliberate, they typically end
[Amit Varma]: up adopting a more extreme
[Amit Varma]: position in line with their
[Amit Varma]: pre-deliberation inclinations.
[Amit Varma]: End quote.
[Amit Varma]: You can see where I'm going with this.
[Amit Varma]: This is pretty much how discourse on the
[Amit Varma]: internet proceeds.
[Amit Varma]: First, we find like-minded people.
[Amit Varma]: This is not always easy in the real world,
[Amit Varma]: where our social circles are small, but
[Amit Varma]: online, no matter what our beliefs
[Amit Varma]: are, the earth is flat, ancient
[Amit Varma]: Indians invented plastic surgery, Barack
[Amit Varma]: Obama is a Muslim, no matter what we believe,
[Amit Varma]: we will find others who believe the same
[Amit Varma]: thing. Feeling validated
[Amit Varma]: and thus empowered, we will
[Amit Varma]: then form an echo chamber with these new
[Amit Varma]: members of ours. And mind you, we could be
[Amit Varma]: part of multiple echo chambers at the same time,
[Amit Varma]: encompassing different beliefs.
[Amit Varma]: We would find comfort in belonging to this
[Amit Varma]: group, and our beliefs would be strengthened
[Amit Varma]: and thus grow more extreme.
[Amit Varma]: What Sunstein called group
[Amit Varma]: polarization. We would then become
[Amit Varma]: impervious to facts. We would ignore
[Amit Varma]: all facts that did not fit our
[Amit Varma]: beliefs, and accept only
[Amit Varma]: those that did.
[Amit Varma]: Behavioral economists call this the confirmation
[Amit Varma]: bias. And this
[Amit Varma]: is exactly why our political discourse
[Amit Varma]: today is so polarized.
[Amit Varma]: On the internet, most arguments
[Amit Varma]: consist not of people talking to
[Amit Varma]: each other, but talking past each
[Amit Varma]: other. This affects not just
[Amit Varma]: content, but also tone. We have
[Amit Varma]: become so shrill and contemptuous
[Amit Varma]: of each other. I had written a
[Amit Varma]: column a few months ago titled
[Amit Varma]: What We Talk About When We Talk About
[Amit Varma]: Politics. A sly nod to Raymond Carver
[Amit Varma]: obviously. My lament in that
[Amit Varma]: piece is that there is no
[Amit Varma]: argument in our political discourse anymore.
[Amit Varma]: Whenever someone says something
[Amit Varma]: that we disagree with, we shift
[Amit Varma]: the focus from the argument to the person.
[Amit Varma]: We attack the person making the argument.
[Amit Varma]: We have no appetite for discussion
[Amit Varma]: because we have already made up our minds,
[Amit Varma]: and opposing views are a threat to us.
[Amit Varma]: Which is why we react so
[Amit Varma]: viscerally. So instead
[Amit Varma]: of refuting the argument, we
[Amit Varma]: attack the person. There are
[Amit Varma]: a number of ways in which this happens.
[Amit Varma]: Let me lay out the common ones, and I'm
[Amit Varma]: sure you'll find them all familiar.
[Amit Varma]: The number one way of personalizing an
[Amit Varma]: argument is whataboutery. For example,
[Amit Varma]: if you mention the Gujarat riots of
[Amit Varma]: 2002, a Narendra Modi fan
[Amit Varma]: might well ask, but what about the anti-Sikh
[Amit Varma]: riots of 1984? Why don't you speak
[Amit Varma]: about that? Whataboutery
[Amit Varma]: is basically two things. One, it
[Amit Varma]: is an attack on the person who made the original
[Amit Varma]: statement. So if I say the 2002
[Amit Varma]: riots were bad, by asking me
[Amit Varma]: what about 1984, you are
[Amit Varma]: implying that I am a hypocrite, and I
[Amit Varma]: don't really care about human life at all.
[Amit Varma]: And two, besides being a personal
[Amit Varma]: attack, it is implicitly
[Amit Varma]: an admission of guilt.
[Amit Varma]: All whataboutery basically says,
[Amit Varma]: yeah, guilty as charged. But what
[Amit Varma]: about those other guys? They're also guilty.
[Amit Varma]: Whataboutery poisons
[Amit Varma]: the discourse by shifting the focus from the
[Amit Varma]: argument to the person. And
[Amit Varma]: it's pointless to engage with the whatabouter.
[Amit Varma]: Often when I speak out for free speech,
[Amit Varma]: when some fringe Hindutva group does something
[Amit Varma]: or the other, I'll get asked, but what about
[Amit Varma]: the Charlie Hebdo murders? What about the Danish cartoonists?
[Amit Varma]: Why were you silent about that?
[Amit Varma]: Now, the truth is I wasn't silent then.
[Amit Varma]: I wrote columns arguing in support of
[Amit Varma]: the Danish cartoonists and the murdered employees
[Amit Varma]: of Charlie Hebdo, and I am a free speech
[Amit Varma]: absolutist regardless of context.
[Amit Varma]: But it's a waste of time
[Amit Varma]: to point this out, because your attacker
[Amit Varma]: will then just move on to method number
[Amit Varma]: two of personalizing an argument.
[Amit Varma]: Before I get to that though, let
[Amit Varma]: me point out that whataboutery is not something
[Amit Varma]: that just trolls on Twitter do.
[Amit Varma]: Politicians do it all the time.
[Amit Varma]: For example, when Arvind Kejriwal was asked about
[Amit Varma]: the tens of crores of taxpayers' money,
[Amit Varma]: our money, coerced from us,
[Amit Varma]: that he spent on running ads for his
[Amit Varma]: government, he asked the reporter,
[Amit Varma]: why are you asking me? What about Modi?
[Amit Varma]: The BJP spends much more on advertising.
[Amit Varma]: End quote. That's a classic
[Amit Varma]: admission of guilt, but no one sees it that way.
[Amit Varma]: Okay, on to method number
[Amit Varma]: two. The second way of
[Amit Varma]: personalizing an argument is to question
[Amit Varma]: your intent. So if I
[Amit Varma]: criticize something that you agree with, you could, for example,
[Amit Varma]: call me a prostitute. Now,
[Amit Varma]: the label baffles me, because I don't view
[Amit Varma]: prostitute as a pejorative at all.
[Amit Varma]: Sex workers are no different morally
[Amit Varma]: from workers of any kind. Even I sell my labor
[Amit Varma]: for money. Nothing wrong with that.
[Amit Varma]: But the implication behind calling someone a prostitute
[Amit Varma]: is that he or she is getting
[Amit Varma]: money for criticizing. They have an
[Amit Varma]: agenda. And therefore, the focus
[Amit Varma]: conveniently shifts from the argument
[Amit Varma]: to the person.
[Amit Varma]: A prostitute is just one version. You could be
[Amit Varma]: a CIA agent. You could be acting
[Amit Varma]: on behalf of China. You could be
[Amit Varma]: funded by a Christian or Jihadi group that
[Amit Varma]: wants to spread their religion. And so on.
[Amit Varma]: So if someone is cooking biryani
[Amit Varma]: for a party, and you enter the kitchen
[Amit Varma]: and see that they're putting rotting dog meat
[Amit Varma]: in the biryani, and you point that out,
[Amit Varma]: imagine them saying, oh, of course
[Amit Varma]: you would say that. You're from the mutton
[Amit Varma]: lobby. And then everyone at the party
[Amit Varma]: surrounds you and they chant, mutton lobby, mutton
[Amit Varma]: lobby, mutton lobby. And then
[Amit Varma]: they all eat the biryani and die. Which is
[Amit Varma]: probably what's going to happen to our democracy.
[Amit Varma]: You get my point?
[Amit Varma]: On now to method number three.
[Amit Varma]: Method number three is identity politics.
[Amit Varma]: Your argument is ignored
[Amit Varma]: because of who you are.
[Amit Varma]: For example, if you're Muslim
[Amit Varma]: or Christian and argue with the BJP,
[Amit Varma]: your argument is irrelevant.
[Amit Varma]: They will invoke your identity and that's the end of that.
[Amit Varma]: And it isn't just the right wing that
[Amit Varma]: does this. The left also does this.
[Amit Varma]: Especially woke millennials who like to talk
[Amit Varma]: about privilege. Now,
[Amit Varma]: privilege exists. It's an excellent
[Amit Varma]: analytical tool and we should all
[Amit Varma]: introspect about the different kinds of privilege
[Amit Varma]: we have benefited from.
[Amit Varma]: But invoking it an argument
[Amit Varma]: is toxic for our discourse.
[Amit Varma]: If someone makes an argument about,
[Amit Varma]: say, reservations, saying that
[Amit Varma]: reservations don't work as intended,
[Amit Varma]: shutting him down just because he is
[Amit Varma]: savarna kills a discourse
[Amit Varma]: right there. If a man makes a comment
[Amit Varma]: about feminism, to say that he
[Amit Varma]: needs to check his privilege and therefore
[Amit Varma]: his argument should be ignored just because
[Amit Varma]: he is a man, is like poison
[Amit Varma]: to the free and open expression that
[Amit Varma]: a democracy needs. Now,
[Amit Varma]: don't get me wrong. Someone may make a poor argument
[Amit Varma]: because of their privilege.
[Amit Varma]: But the thing to do there is to point out
[Amit Varma]: the flaw in their argument
[Amit Varma]: rather than to invoke their identity.
[Amit Varma]: To refuse to engage
[Amit Varma]: with someone's argument just because of
[Amit Varma]: a person's identity, usually
[Amit Varma]: something they have no control over.
[Amit Varma]: It's just toxic. Again, thinking
[Amit Varma]: about privilege is useful
[Amit Varma]: in terms of analysis of how
[Amit Varma]: opinions get formed and so on.
[Amit Varma]: But invoking it in conversation
[Amit Varma]: just ends the conversation right there.
[Amit Varma]: What's the point of this?
[Amit Varma]: Method number 4 is actually
[Amit Varma]: an extension of method number 3,
[Amit Varma]: labelling. So someone makes an
[Amit Varma]: argument and you call them a libtard or a
[Amit Varma]: bhakt or an aaptard or a pinko
[Amit Varma]: or a commie and then refuse to engage.
[Amit Varma]: The label is meant as a pejorative
[Amit Varma]: and you use it not only to dismiss a person
[Amit Varma]: but by extension
[Amit Varma]: to also dismiss their argument.
[Amit Varma]: There are many ways of ending
[Amit Varma]: an argument other than personalising
[Amit Varma]: it which are also intellectually dishonest.
[Amit Varma]: Arthur Schopenhauer had once written
[Amit Varma]: a great essay called
[Amit Varma]: 38 ways to end an argument.
[Amit Varma]: I reposted this on India Uncut so if you
[Amit Varma]: head there you can search for it over there.
[Amit Varma]: These include time-honoured methods like
[Amit Varma]: shifting goalposts, attacking
[Amit Varma]: strawmen and so on. Schopenhauer
[Amit Varma]: intended his piece to be cautionary
[Amit Varma]: but I'm sure it's used
[Amit Varma]: as an instruction manual by some people.
[Amit Varma]: Now, some of you might say
[Amit Varma]: given how things are,
[Amit Varma]: why even bother to engage with people
[Amit Varma]: on social media? On Twitter for example
[Amit Varma]: the main rhetorical tool
[Amit Varma]: employed is snark.
[Amit Varma]: It's much easier to make fun of someone
[Amit Varma]: thereby feeling superior yourself
[Amit Varma]: than to actually engage with humility.
[Amit Varma]: If you can do this in a clever way
[Amit Varma]: you will get many RTs and
[Amit Varma]: talis from others in your echo chamber.
[Amit Varma]: Isn't that gratifying?
[Amit Varma]: And indeed, most conversation
[Amit Varma]: at least most political conversation
[Amit Varma]: on Twitter is equal parts preaching
[Amit Varma]: to the choir and being gratuitously
[Amit Varma]: derogatory to opponents.
[Amit Varma]: On the one hand, if someone disagrees with you
[Amit Varma]: you stick a label on them. Hypocrite,
[Amit Varma]: prostitute, fool, whatever and dismiss them.
[Amit Varma]: And too much of what I see on
[Amit Varma]: Twitter also is virtue signalling.
[Amit Varma]: People saying, look, I am
[Amit Varma]: so noble or compassionate
[Amit Varma]: or woke and so on.
[Amit Varma]: Indeed, I suggest that before we
[Amit Varma]: post anything on Twitter, we should ask
[Amit Varma]: ourselves two questions.
[Amit Varma]: And I'll call this the Amit Verma test for
[Amit Varma]: social media posting.
[Amit Varma]: Question number one, am I being derogatory
[Amit Varma]: about someone?
[Amit Varma]: Question number two, am I trying to show
[Amit Varma]: myself in a good light?
[Amit Varma]: If the answer to either of these questions is yes,
[Amit Varma]: don't make that post.
[Amit Varma]: Just watch a cat video on YouTube or something.
[Amit Varma]: There are better ways to waste your time.
[Amit Varma]: I'll end this episode here.
[Amit Varma]: Thanks for listening so far.
[Amit Varma]: If you have any feedback, either negative or positive
[Amit Varma]: about this first attempt of mine to record
[Amit Varma]: a solo episode, do let me know
[Amit Varma]: on Twitter or elsewhere.
[Amit Varma]: My Twitter handle is
[Amit Varma]: amitverma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A.
[Amit Varma]: You can listen to past episodes of the
[Amit Varma]: Seen and the Unseen at
[Amit Varma]: seenunseen.in. And if you go to the
[Amit Varma]: podcast page on Think Pragati or on
[Amit Varma]: seenunseen.in, I also have
[Amit Varma]: some links to pieces I have written in the past
[Amit Varma]: tackling the sort of topics
[Amit Varma]: I have examined in this episode.
[Amit Varma]: Have a great year, and hey,
[Amit Varma]: this year, listen more than you talk.
[Amit Varma]: Goodbye for now.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to the Seen and the Unseen,
[Amit Varma]: check out another show by
[Amit Varma]: IVM Podcasts, Symbolified,
[Amit Varma]: which is hosted by my good friends
[Amit Varma]: Naren, Chuck and Sriket.
[Amit Varma]: You can download it on any podcasting network.
[Unknown]: Thank you.